## The Afterlife of Empire: Contemporary Effects of Colonization
  
### Introduction
In 1960, the United Nations released and ultimately adopted Resolution 1514: "Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples." In this resolution, the General Assembly is "*convinced* that the continued existence of colonialism prevents the development of international economic cooperation [and] impedes the social, cultural and economic development of dependent peoples" and thus "*declares* that... All peoples have the right to self determination; by virtue of that they freely determine their political status and freely pursue their economic, social and cultural development" (United Nations General Assembly, 1960; emphasis in original). Though this resolution was not the cause nor the beginning of the dissolution of empires worldwide, its adoption was part of an ongoing global process of decolonization: a process defined as the withdrawing of colonial power by empires, and colonies’ acquisition of political and economic independence (Kennedy, 2016). 

While both the United Nations’ resolution and the definition of decolonization suggest voluntary transfers of power resulting in colonies’ self determination, this was rarely the case. Despite a stated freedom to pursue economic, social, and cultural development, the spectre of empire often limited the capacities of former colonies in such pursuits. Rather, former colonies are left with the “aftershocks of empire” and empire’s “social afterlife” (Stoler, 2008). The United Nations recognized the impediment on development that imperial presences caused, but this impediment did not necessarily end with formal decolonization. As such, *we* are then left with the following questions: *what are the contemporary effects of colonization on former colonies? How might colonial circumstances affect the economic, social, and political realities of former colonies?*  

There has been quite a bit of scholarship on the effects of colonization, but to many, colonization is relegated to a distasteful past if not forgotten entirely. Before engaging with colonization and its continued realities academically, my understanding of colonization was purely historical. The independence narratives I had learned about were triumphant stories, like that of the American Revolution, where the yoke of empire was cast off for good. In many cases, these narratives are far more complicated, and not necessarily over. Through this project, I hope to make the complexities of imperial afterlives a little more approachable, to introduce those who might be otherwise unaware of it that there is imperial continuity to our present day. Though my research questions are not novel, finding an introduction to this topic is not easy. I hope to make this wide-ranging, interdisciplinary field just a little bit more accessible. I cannot distill all dimensions of all colonial lineages, but I hope to present an introduction to an interested viewer. 

### Methods

To begin to understand the contemporary effects of colonization, one must first understand the scope of empire. So as to situate viewers that may be unfamiliar with global empires, the first visualization that viewers see is a world map, where they are able to fill in present-day countries with the empires which once controlled them. The map takes up the entire width of the screen, so that it appears as large as possible. Narrative text appears below, so as to not be too obtrusive. When the map is fully filled, it is apparent that much of the world, particularly the Global South, was once colonized. While I could have presented a static map color-coded by empire, the element of interactivity—the ability to select one or multiple empires—allows viewers to isolate particular imperial powers to better understand their global reach. Further, in having to manually add each empire to the map to fully fill it in, viewers can see the change in the map as each is added, creating a more visually engaging experience. Lastly, I chose to use a saturated rainbow color scheme against a white background so as to maximize visual interest as well as visual contrast between empires. Each empire retains their distinctive color throughout the rest of the visualizations in the app, providing a visual throughline that reduces interpretive burden on viewers. 

In addition to understanding the geographic scope of empires to begin to understand their contemporary effects, viewers must understand their timelines. As such, the next tab, “Empires Over Time,” features two plots regarding the temporal dimension of empire. The first plot within this tab features a visualization depicting how many active colonies each empire contained throughout history. It is inspired by [this visualization](https://ourworldindata.org/grapher/european-overseas-colonies-by-colonizer?time=earliest..2014), created by political scientist Bastian Becker, who compiled the colonization data used in my project. Becker’s visualization features an area representation of this data. I chose to use geom_line instead of something like geom_density or geom_area, so that the y-axis could display the number of colonies per empire without stacking totals, and to attain a more minimal appearance. Though at first the layering of lines may seem confusing, the use of Plotly interactivity ensures that viewers may isolate a single empire and track its colonies over time. Further, viewers can hover over each line and see exactly how many active colonies each empire controlled by year. The color story remains the same as in the previous graphs for narrative continuity. I chose not to add a slider, so as to emphasize lengths, dates, and sizes of empires relative to one another. Finally, the associated narrative component provides some introductory historical context to situate these timelines, including important dates. In engaging with colonial timelines in conjunction with geographical scope, viewers are able to understand the context for the contemporary effects described in later visualizations.  

Now, in the “Economic Effects” tab, viewers are able to start reckoning with the ways in which imperial presences have impacted the economies of their colonies. Economic effects of empire are the most intuitive, which is why this is the first tab to engage with contemporary effects. The lay understanding of colonization is primarily in terms of economic relationships between empires and their colonies [^1]. Thus, the shift in the visual narrative to effects begins with more familiar terrain. The guiding question for this tab is thus front and center: “What are the economic effects of colonization?” While this is a broad question with complex, nuanced answers, I chose to highlight two specific effects for my audience: GDP and Gini. 

Within the “Economic Effects” tab, viewers first land upon the “GDP” tab, as GDP is a more accessible economic measurement that viewers may already be familiar with, and is a broad measure of economic health. This visualization displays a scatter plot of the relationship between a colony’s duration and their GDP in 2023, compared to the median GDP of countries that have never been colonized. I chose to use length, or colonial duration, as the x-axis to suggest that the longer a colony spent under empire, the greater the potential impact on GDP. I chose to log scale the y-axis for readability, and so as to include outliers. The reference line for countries that have never been colonized is median GDP, because mean is more susceptible to skew. I chose to include a reference line because this was the cleanest way to This plot features Plotly interactivity so that viewers may engage with empires singularly, or all together. The accompanying narrative provides viewers with a guiding question, the necessary context for this visualization, some basic interactivity instructions, and additional resources. 
	
The next subtab within “Economic Effects” is “Gini,” which displays average Gini index by colonizer over time. I want to note that I have used “colonizer” and “empire” interchangeably throughout, which is an intentional choice: I want to emphasize that empires are colonizers which participated in acts of colonization. Through visual continuity and context, viewers should understand these terms is interchangeable, and the underlying connotative message should hold. In this Gini visualization, at first, the only visible line is that of countries that have never been colonized, framing it as a reference line. Viewers are prompted to choose one or more colonizers to add, so that they can compare the trajectories of income inequality over time both individually and all together. Viewers may also use the slider to focus on particular periods; given the previous tab, this prompts viewers to engage with historical areas of interest. The narrative provides some situating context and definitions, instructions, and additional resources. 

I chose to focus on Gini in particular for two reasons. First, as described in the narrative, colonization creates conditions wherein inequality may thrive. The nature of a colonizer-colonized relationship is one where indigenous populations are socially and economically disadvantaged relative to power-holding colonizers. Even after formal decolonization, empires leave behind “‘the tinge of decay’—the indelible smack of degraded personhood, occupied spaces, and limited possibilities—that were (and remain) hardest to erase)” (Stoler, 2008). As such, hierarchies of inequality remain, even when empires may not. Further, regardless of whether or not there ever were settler populations, the depressive effect of empire on local economies may allow inequality to thrive. The second reason that I chose to focus on Gini is that wealth inequality is one means by which cultures develop more distinctive cultural values, which gives additional theoretical grounding for the inclusion of social values in the following tab (Jackson & Medvedev, 2024); one might thus expect to see greater distance between values of former colonies and values of countries that have never been colonized. 

The next main tab highlights relationships between colonial duration and a number of sociopolitical values by empire, compared to mean value scores of countries that have never been colonized. Values are taken from the World Values Survey’s (WVS) most recent wave, and were chosen on the basis of thematic relation to my research question. Where economic effects may be a more obvious dimension of ways in which empire affects former colonies today, measures of social values allow viewers to delve deeper into imperial afterlife.  In this visualization, viewers are able to choose which WVS item grouping they would like to focus on. Viewers are given the ability to choose as opposed to seeing all of the graphs at once; though they can only view one value at a time, this prevents information from becoming too overwhelming, and forces viewers to more deeply engage with each value. Using Plotly interactivity, they can also hover over each data point for more country-specific information, or double click to highlight a single empire. The ability to view values in terms of empire groupings allows viewers to contend with whether or not cultural value similarities exist between the colonies of former empires, and to what extent imperial circumstances have affected the trajectories of certain values. In particular, as noted in the text included with this visualization, length of time spent as a colony may affect how certain values developed: the longer a country is colonized, the more that colonizer culture and the state of being colonized might affect values. 

Lastly, viewers arrive at the “Constitutions” tab, which features a visualization of the amount of mentions of rights in existing constitutional documents against the number of total colonies per year, per colonizer. I chose to focus on constitutions because the ratification of such a governing document is a sign of self-determination in a way that is recognized by other countries in the global order (Baxi, 2007; Go, 2003), as well as a sign of transition into formal decolonization. I chose to focus on constitutional inclusion of rights in particular, as this is a commonality between many of the constitutions of formerly colonized nations, in a way that appears to be a response to their colonial pasts (Baxi, 2007; Go, 2003). 

Where the plot in “Empires over Time” displays a count line over time, I chose to present this relationship in faceted bar plots with a corresponding year slider. This type of plot allows me to emphasize the comparison between the number of mentions of rights relative to the number of colonies per empire. Viewers are able to choose a particular year to focus on; viewers can see and think about how particular years might have affected the differential between the number of colonies an empire has and the number of corresponding former colonies with constitutions that mention rights. Viewers may also choose to play an animation, to see how differences in count have changed over time, in real time [^2]. This animation emphasizes periods of shift, where certain counts become higher. For instance, in the early 19th century, viewers see that Spain’s number of colonies is decreasing as the number of constitutions mentioning rights in their former colonies increases: this is a visual representation of the first wave of decolonization, where many former Spanish colonies became independent (Kennedy, 2016). This greater narrative is alluded to in this visualization’s associated text, giving viewers concepts to think about as they engage with this visualization. Lastly, though the main research question is with regard to contemporary effects of colonization, this plot allows viewers to situate contemporary realities in their historical lineages: they are able to see how specific imperial timelines converge at the present day. 

### Results and Discussion
	
Each plot in this project is a piece of the narrative that unfolds in response to my research questions. Through these visualizations, unfamiliar viewers are able to situate themselves within the geographical and historical context of global empires, before contending with potential effects. Further, my focus on economy, values, and governing documents alludes to the thesis of United Nations Resolution 1514, asking viewers to what extent former colonies have been free to pursue development in these areas after formal decolonization, when empires have left their fingerprints on the trajectories of these nations. My audience learns about the more indirect contemporary effects of colonization, and why such effects have staying power. A less knowledgeable viewer is still able to engage with my visualizations in beginning to learn about the contentious process of decolonization, while a more knowledgeable viewer is able to engage with the specifics as well as entailed narrative implications. 
	
In terms of the principles of design, I created each visualization with the intention to maximize every principle. I designed axes, variables, and descriptions in such a way that the narrative of the plot would be clear while still truthfully representing the data. Of course, my data sources limited my design choices (I only had long term historical data in some data sources), but I tried to incorporate as much relevant information in my visualizations as possible, so as to reduce the possibility of misleading plots. For instance, in my “Constitutions” plot, I considered only including mentions of rights; this would be misleading, as it would present larger empires as becoming more rights-focused relative to smaller empires, when in reality, these empires merely had more subjugation writ large. 

I utilized interactivity to maximize visualization functionality and insight, so that viewers could draw their own conclusions about contemporary effects with as much information as possible. Further, the inclusion of multiple contextual plots (the map and the timeline) contributes to truthfulness, functionality, and insight as well, as they provide relevant contextual information to drawing conclusions from following visualizations. Through my inclusion of narrative (that are intentionally less explicit in intended conclusions), as well as the way in which my plots highlight comparisons, viewers are able to gain insights into colonial histories that they might not otherwise have known, thus facilitating enlightenment as well. All of my visualizations were created with the intention to facilitate enlightenment, to draw attention to continued realities of empire that viewers may be otherwise unaware of. Lastly, every aspect of this project has been designed with beauty in mind. I chose colors that would work nicely together, creating a pleasing visual throughline throughout each plot. I made sure that they would render in a large enough size to be accessible and engaging. I created a custom plot theme so that each plot would look professional, and so that visualizations overall would look cohesive. The order of tabs suggests a particular narrative flow, and bolding is used throughout to draw readers’ attention to important information. I also created a custom CSS theme to tie together the fonts and colors in the project.  
	
All aspects of this project were carefully considered both in terms of how they contribute to my research question, as well as how well they would contribute to the overall design scheme of the project as a whole. This project is meant to be accessible, approachable, and interesting to viewers of varying familiarity with colonization, and is intended to translate conceptual complexities in a visually understandable way. The process of creating this project has given me a lot of insight into this topic, and I hope that audiences are able to take away something similar, and answer the question, "what are the contemporary effects of colonization?" themselves.

[^1]: Thinking back to the American colonial example, we are all familiar with the refrain “no taxation without representation”; the emphasis on such rhetoric in our history classes creates a view of colonization that is primarily economic in nature. Similarly, on the first day of Colonizations II (the second course in the so-named Civilizations sequence at the University of Chicago), when our professor prompted us to consider the primary reasons for which an empire might acquire a colony, the first five responses were all in terms of economy and resource extraction. 

[^2]: The frame rate is slower so as to reduce lagging in the published version. 

### References

1. Baxi, U. (2007). Postcolonial Legality. 10.1002/9780470997024.ch29. 
2. Dane K. Decolonization: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford University Press, 2016.
3. Go, J. (2003). A Globalizing Constitutionalism?Views from the Postcolony, 1945-2000. International Sociology - INT SOCIOL. 18. 71-95. 10.1177/0268580903018001005. .
4. Jackson, J. & Medvedev, D. (2024). Worldwide divergence of values. Nature Communications. 15. 10.1038/s41467-024-46581-5. 
5. Stoler, A. L. “Imperial Debris: Reflections on Ruins and Ruination.” Cultural Anthropology 23, no. 2 (May 2008): 191–219. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1548-1360.2008.00007.x.
6. United Nations General Assembly. “Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples (Resolution 1514),” December 14, 1960.

#### Data Sources

1. Becker, B. (2019). *Colonial Dates Dataset (COLDAT) (Version 3)* [Data set]. Harvard Dataverse. https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/T9SDEW
2. Elkins, Z. and Tom G. (2022) *Characteristics of National Constitutions, Version 4.0.* Comparative Constitutions Project. comparativeconstitutionsproject.org.
Haerpfer, C., Inglehart, R., Moreno, A., Welzel, C., Kizilova, K., Diez-Medrano J., M. Lagos, 3. P. Norris, E. Ponarin & B. Puranen (eds.). (2022) *World Values Survey: Round Seven – Country-Pooled Datafile Version 6.0.* Madrid, Spain & Vienna, Austria: JD Systems Institute & WVSA Secretariat. doi:10.14281/18241.24
4. Rosling, O. (2017). *Gini Data v3* [Data set]. Gapminder. https://www.gapminder.org/data/documentation/gini/
5. *World Development Indicators.* [Data set]. World Bank Group. https://databank.worldbank.org/reports.aspx?source=2&series=NY.GDP.MKTP.CD&country#

#### Sources used for app text

1. Callen, T. (n.d.). Gross domestic product: An economy’s all. Finance and Development Magazine. https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/fandd/issues/Series/Back-to-Basics/gross-domestic-product-GDP#:~:text=GDP%20is%20important%20because%20it,the%20economy%20is%20doing%20well
Cartwright, M. (2021, May 27). The Portuguese colonization of Cape Verde. World History Encyclopedia. https://www.worldhistory.org/article/1762/the-portuguese-colonization-of-cape-verde/
2. Cornell Law School. (n.d.). Self determination (international law). Legal Information Institute. https://www.law.cornell.edu/wex/self_determination_(international_law)#:~:text=Self%2Ddetermination%20denotes%20the%20legal,a%20number%20of%20international%20treaties. 
3. Encyclopædia Britannica, inc. (n.d.). New France. Encyclopædia Britannica. https://www.britannica.com/place/New-France 
4. National Institutes of Health. (n.d.). AD 1493: Spanish settlers enslave the Taíno of Hispaniola. Native Voices. https://www.nlm.nih.gov/nativevoices/timeline/170.html#:~:text=Spain%20founds%20Santo%20Domingo%2C%20the,all%20labor%20on%20the%20island. 
5. Robinson, J. A., & Acemoglu, D. (2017, January 30). The economic impact of colonialism. Vox CEPR. https://cepr.org/voxeu/columns/economic-impact-colonialism 
6. U.S. Department of the Interior. (2022, September 16). A Short History of Jamestown. National Parks Service. https://www.nps.gov/jame/learn/historyculture/a-short-history-of-jamestown.htm#:~:text=In%201607%2C%20104%20English%20men,English%20settlement%20in%20North%20America. 
7. World Bank Group. (n.d.). Metadata Glossary. Databank. https://databank.worldbank.org/metadataglossary/gender-statistics/series/SI.POV.GINI
---